> From: [eLinux.org](http://eLinux.org/Time_Sys "http://eLinux.org/Time_Sys")


# TimeSys


(Redirected from [Time
Sys](http://eLinux.org/index.php?title=Time_Sys&redirect=no "Time Sys"))


Timesys is a pioneer and industry leader in providing embedded Linux
solutions. The company is committed to providing easy-to-use embedded
Linux offerings for embedded developers targeting Linux as their
go-to-market platform.

Timesys' LinuxLink is a free suite of development tools that supports a
wide variety of popular processors and associated development platforms.
It enables developers to quickly design, prototype, build (online or
locally), debug, deploy and maintain a custom embedded Linux based
device. LinuxLink is an end-to-end workflow utilizing open source
components such as makefiles and Yocto Project build environments,
Eclipse-based and other GNU tools, and a framework in which to
efficiently work and collaborate.

In addition to LinuxLink, Timesys offers project-based commercial
support (whether using the LinuxLink Factory or the Yocto Project build
system), professional services and customized training.

Timesys was founded in 1996, with headquarters in Pittsburgh, PA and
offices in Austin, TX and Poznan, Poland. Timesys' solutions have been
used globally in markets that include medical, automotive,
telecommunications/networking, industrial control/process automation,
military/aerospace and consumer electronics. The company has an
extensive global partner ecosystem, so no matter where their customers
are located, Timesys can provide them with a comprehensive solution
tailored to meet their product requirements.

[http://www.timesys.com/](http://www.timesys.com/)


[Category](http://eLinux.org/Special:Categories "Special:Categories"):

-   [Linux](http://eLinux.org/Category:Linux "Category:Linux")

