> From: [eLinux.org](http://eLinux.org/J1939 "http://eLinux.org/J1939")


# J1939



## Contents

-   [1 SAE J1939 in Linux](#sae-j1939-in-linux)
    -   [1.1 overview](#overview)
        -   [1.1.1 Specifications](#specifications)
    -   [1.2 Sources](#sources)
    -   [1.3 Build](#build)
        -   [1.3.1 Build the kernel
            (necessary)](#build-the-kernel-necessary)
        -   [1.3.2 Build can-j1939-utils
            (recommended)](#build-can-j1939-utils-recommended)
        -   [1.3.3 Build iproute2-j1939
            (recommended)](#build-iproute2-j1939-recommended)
        -   [1.3.4 Getting Started with
            J1939](#getting-started-with-j1939)

# SAE J1939 in Linux

## overview

See also on [Wikipedia](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/J1939).

SAE J1939 defines a higher layer protocol on CAN. It implements a more
sophisticated addressing scheme and extends the maximum packet size
above 8 bytes. Several derived specifications exists, which differ from
the original j1939 on the application level, like MilCAN, NMEA2000 and
especially ISO-11783 (ISOBUS). This last one specifies the so-called ETP
(Extended Transport Protocol) which is has been included in this
implementation. This inclusion results in a maximum packet size of
((2\^24)-1)\*7 bytes

### Specifications

-   SAE J1939-21 : data link layer
-   SAE J1939-81 : network management
-   ISO 11783-6  : Virtual Terminal (Extended Transport Protocol)

## Sources

Support for SAE J1939 in Linux consists of 3 parts:

-   [j1939 linux kernel](http://github.com/kurt-vd/linux)
-   [j1939 can-utils](http://github.com/kurt-vd/can-utils)
-   [j1939 iproute2](http://github.com/kurt-vd/iproute2)

You probably want all 3 components to get a J1939 linux node working.
The J1939 specific code resides in dedicated branches.

The final goal is to have these source trees mainlined.

## Build

### Build the kernel (necessary)

       $ git clone <yourfavoritelinuxkernel> linux
       $ cd linux
       $ git remote add j1939 git://github.com/kurt-vd/linux
       $ git remote update j1939
       $ git merge j1939/j1939-vX.X
       $ make etc.

With j1939-vX.X the branch that matches the closest, but not higher,
with your linux version.

### Build can-j1939-utils (recommended)

       $ git clone git://github.com/kurt-vd/can-utils
       $ cd can-utils
       $ make etc.

Or you may merge the j1939 changes into any other can-utils version.
This should be fairly simple.

If the branch of linux-can-j1939 that you merged into your kernel was
for version 3.7 or higher, use the j1939-v6 branch of can-j1939-utils.

### Build iproute2-j1939 (recommended)

       $ git clone git://github.com/kurt-vd/iproute2
       $ cd iproute2
       $ git checkout j1939-vX.X
       $ make etc.

With j1939-vX.X the branch that matches the closest, but not higher,
with your linux version.

Or you may merge the j1939 changes into any other iproute2 version. This
may be a little more complicated.

### Getting Started with J1939

First get a can0 bus on your system.

       $ modprobe vcan
       $ ip link add can0 type vcan
       $ ip link set can0 up

Now start j1939.

       $ modprobe can-j1939
       $ ip link set can0 j1939 on

Now you should be able to use can0 as a j1939 CAN device.


[Category](http://eLinux.org/Special:Categories "Special:Categories"):

-   [Networking](http://eLinux.org/Category:Networking "Category:Networking")

