> From: [eLinux.org](http://eLinux.org/CELinux "http://eLinux.org/CELinux")


# CELinux




 The Consumer Electronics Linux Forum (CELF) has developed and published
its baseline Linux source code, making it available for download and
review by the open-source community.

The source tree includes initial improvements to startup and shutdown
time, real-time functionality, ROM/RAM size requirements and power
management that address the needs of CE devices, including audio/visual
products and mobile phones.

With 22 additional companies joining the CELF since its inception, the
group has made preliminary enhancements to the Linux platform for
consumer electronics devices. Five companies -- IBM, Hewlett-Packard
Company, LG Electronics Inc., Motorola and Nokia Corporation -- have
joined the Steering Committee that was originally formed by Hitachi,
Ltd., Matsushita Electric Industrial Co., Ltd, NEC Corporation, Royal
Philips Electronics, Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd., Sharp Corporation,
Sony Corporation, and Toshiba Corporation.

"This significant achievement marks the first stage of the efforts of
the CELF," said Scott Smyers, chairman of the CELF Steering Committee.
"Starting with a version of the Linux kernel, the Architecture Group of
the CELF has worked very hard to realize the first version of the CELF
source tree. Starting today, I very much look forward to working within
the established process of the CELF to reach consensus on the needs and
requirements of the CE industry, and I further look forward to working
with the CELF member companies and with the open source community to
deliver top of class solutions to those needs through an open-source
based, open and fair process."

The CELF plans to continue discussing the extensions to Linux with the
goal to publish its first formal specification before the first
anniversary of the forum.

The source is now available at
[http://tree.celinuxforum.org](http://tree.celinuxforum.org). The set of
supported platforms in this first release is small, but will grow over
time as additional support is provided by forum members. The source is
provided under the terms of the GNU General Public License. Non-members
of the forum are invited to evaluate and use the source tree. Feedback
and contributions are welcome. Information about a public mailing list
for discussions about the source tree is available at the web site.

Information about the CE Linux Forum and member lists details are
available at:
[http://www.celinuxforum.org](http://www.celinuxforum.org).


[Categories](http://eLinux.org/Special:Categories "Special:Categories"):

-   [CELF](http://eLinux.org/Category:CELF "Category:CELF")
-   [CELinux](http://eLinux.org/Category:CELinux "Category:CELinux")

